# Phthalate and Temperature Acute Exposure Experiment

## *summer 2022 pae-temp-pool-party*

The objective of this experiment is to look at the potential changes in microbial community, phthalate accumulation in coral tissue, and an omics metric in small coral fragments that were exposed to 5 levels of phthalates and 2 temperature regimes in a mesocosm for 48 hours.

On Friday August 5th 2022 Dr. Jacqueline Padilla-Gamiño, Callum Backstrom, and Sarah Tanja collected 10 genetically distinct *Montipora capitata* coral colonies from the southeastern fringing reef of Coconut Island, in Kaneohe Bay, HI at the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology. The ten colonies were collected while snorkeling, and swam by hand back to the nearshore beach access area and kept submerged in shallow water. Each colony was labelled 1-10 using a cow tag and twine. Approximately 3cm fragments were collected from each colony, clipped using a small bone cutter that was sterilized with 70% ethanol between cutting from each colony. The ~3cm fragments were cut down further to fit into two 1.5mL cryovials, and immediately dropped into a small thermos of liquid nitrogen and flash frozen. We repeated this step until we had collected and frozen two cryovials of sample from each of the 10 colonies.  Once all samples were collected and floating, frozen in liquid nitrogen, we carried the thermos and an empty wax cryovial box to the -80 freezer farm and quickly picked the cryovials out of the liquid nitrogen using long forceps, and placed them in the box, and then in the -80 freezer for storage. This initial sample serves as an environmental baseline for transcription and microbial communities for each colony prior to moving them into the experimental tanks to acclimate. The colonies were then placed in one large blue tub together with a flow through of unfiltered seawater and a pump to acclimate for 24 hours. On Saturday August 6th 2022 Sarah Tanja used small bone cutters to clip 14 3cm fragments from each of the 10 colonies. Sarah sterilized the bone cutters with 70% ethanol between each colony. Sarah cut and placed the 3cm fragments on 10 small egg-crate shelves, each labelled 1-10 and corresponding to colonies 1-10. She worked quickly, making 1 or 2 cuts at a time, measuring each fragment against a ruler, checking that they would fit into a 20mL scintillation vial, and placing them on their corresponding egg-crate shelf to acclimate. The acclimation tub was set-up    

I setup 2 ambient control flow-through water baths, and 2 high temperature flow-through water baths using Apex Systems aquarium controllers. I programmed the high temperature baths to 2 degrees warmer than the average ambient temperatures. Dr. Padilla-Gamino collected 10 genetically distinct Montipora capitata colonies, which we first collected 1 3cm fragment from, and allowed to acclimate in a separate ambient temperature flow-through tank. I then cut 13 nubbins (3cm fragments) from each colony and allowed the nubbins to heal and acclimate. I prepared 20mL scintillaton vials with control and phthalate treatments, and transferred one nubbin from each colony into each treatment 